In the previous examples we used certain numeric
values to define the values of our variables.
But when we are generating our parametric designs,
sometimes it's interesting to use random values.
Imagine for example you want to generate a
series of variations of a certain layout or
a certain shape, then it might be interesting
to use a random value, to introduce noise,
to introduce different shapes and layouts. And to
do this, there is a really nice helper function
from p5.js, the "random" function that we can use.
And inside the "random" function, if we provide no
parameters, it's a value between 0 and 1, but
we can also provide a "min" and "max" value for
the random number that should be generated. In our
case, we want a grayscale value between 0 and 255.
And if i save this, you can see that
now every time i save the sketch,
there's a different color being used as a
background. We could of course also move this
to our draw function. Which then would generate
different random values on each draw cycle.
There is one little important thing about the
"random" function. The "random" function is
part of p5.js, so it's only available once all
the p5js setup is done. So all the setting up of
functions and features for p5.js. So
inside preload, inside setup, inside draw,
you can use the random function. But imagine you
want to define your variable in the "global scope"
at the beginning of your sketch.js file. I will
just paste the random function here and now,
because random is not yet available, you will
receive an error message, saying "random is not
defined". To overcome this you can either do the
setup as I did before, just define the variable
in the "global scope" and then set the value
of your variable inside the "setup" function.
But there's also another way, because if you're
using any other library than p5.js, you will have
the same problem, because there is no "random"
function. So there is a native "random" function
and you can get it by writing "Math.random" and
then brackets this will generate a value between 0
and 1. It has no parameters, so you cannot define
"min" and "max". So we need to do this manually,
in this case, we simply need to say, the value
between 0 and 1 should be multiplied by 255.
Generating us a value between 0 and 255. And if I
save this, it works again, because "Math.random()"
is always available. Because it's a native
JavaScript function. So just have this in mind,
if you're defining variables in the "global scope"
you don't have access to the "random" function,
yet. So either use "Math.random()" or define
the values inside the "setup" function.